Attention:
- Do not edit this file in text editors like Word. Use a plain text editor only. In case of doubt, you can use Spyder as a text editor.
- Do not change the structure of this file. Just fill in your answers in the places provided (After the R#: tag).
- You can add lines in the spaces for your answers but your answers should be brief and straight to the point.
- You can include references to images or html files such as the reports generated with clusters. To do this, simply include this document in the folder with the reports or images and refer them in the text by the file name in an isolated line. For example, the line

test.png

refers to a test.png image file in the same folder as this document.

QUESTIONS:


Q1: After extracting the attributes, did you standardize or normalize the values? Justify your decision.
R1: We tested normalizing and standardizing the data after extraction, after checking the metric plots we decided to normalize the data.


Q2: Explain how you found the parameters for the clustering algorithms.
R2: We plotted the different metrics(purity, Precision, Recall, the F1 measure, and the Rand index), varying the cluster parameters and decided which were the best depending on the performances.


Q3: Describe your analysis of the parameters using the internal and external indicators referred in the assignment page. Include the plots for the indicator values (indicating the image name of each plot in one line in your answer) as a function of the parameters and explain how you chose the ranges for examining these parameters. Indicate, with justification, what conclusions you can draw from this analysis.
R3: By examining the plots of the different metrics, we can verify which parameters have the best overall performance.
The plots show that for agglomerative clustering the purity and the rand index increases with increase in the number of clusters. Whereas the precision, recall and f1 score decrease with the increase in the number of clusters. By varying the distance threshold, we can see that the purity decreases with the increase in the distance whereas therand index has a big decrease after a distance of approximately 4.2.
For spectral clustering the purity and the rand index increases with increase in the number of clusters, the precision starts increasing with 5 clusters, the recall and f1, starts decreasing from 4 clusters.
The plots show that for kmeans clustering the purity and the rand index approximately stabilizes after two clusters. Whereas the precision and recall increase until 5 clusters, decreasing after that. The kmeans loss decreases with the increase in the number of clusters.
For the range of the number of cluster it does not make sense a number of clusters above 10, as such, we chose the range of values between 1 and 10.

plots: plot_measure_distances.png and plot_measure_nclusters.png

Q4: Select some of the parameter values tested in the question above and examine the corresponding clusters more closely, generating the HTML file with the images. Explain how you selected these parameter values, discuss the different options and propose a recommendation that could help the biologists' task of classifying cells and rejecting segmentation errors.
R4:By checking the metrics plots we decided that the best parameter value is having 3 clusters for kmeans, 6 clusters for agglomerative clustering and 4 clusters for kmeans. We would recommend using an agglomerative clustering algorythm with 6 clusters to classify cells and reject segmentation errors.


Q5: Discuss advantages or problems with the algorithms analysed for the purpose of helping biologists to organize these images, considering your theoretical knowledge of these algorithms as well as the results you obtained in your work.
R5: One of the advantages of the algorithms is that they are fast to run therefore the biologists can organize the images more quickly.
Given that the input data are images and the color of one pixel is closely related to the color of another pixel given their distance, another advantage is that the metric/distance used in the clustering algorithms makes sense in this context.
The main issue of the algorithms is that they return clusters even if there is no relation in the input images which can mislead the biologists.


Q6: Consider other clustering algorithms embedded in the Scikit-Learn library. Choose one and apply it to this problem, optimizing the parameters you deem appropriate in the way that you find adequate. Justify your choices and discuss whether this option would yield more useful results for biologists.
R6: The clustering algorithm chosen from the Scikit-Learn library was the OPTICS algorithm because it uses the euclidian distance (which makes sense in this context), it returns clusters of different sizes and is a transductive algorithms (which enables the use of the labeled data).


(Optional) Q7: Explain how you selected the best attributes for the clustering phase. In particular, indicate the visualization methods used to explore the extracted attributes and any statistical tests used.
R7:


(Optional) Q8: Implement the Bissecting K-Means hierarchical clustering algorithm as described in the assignment page and Lecture 19. Examine and discuss the results and their application to the problem of helping the biologists select and classify cell images.
R8: This algorithm clusters the dataset into hierarchical clusters and thus can help biologists cluster images of cell that are in the same phase showing differences between the cells.